README.md, before:

# xv6-riscv-rust
This is a project intending to port xv6-riscv using Rust.  
Most of major differences will be mentioned below,  
while minor differences go to the document/comment in relevant source files.

## Note
1. can only compile on target triple `riscv64gc-unknown-none-elf`,  
refer *.cargo/config* for detail

## Usage
Run:
```
cargo run
```
Objdump:
```
cargo objdump --bin xv6-riscv-rust -- -d > kernel.asm

// recommended, some instructions is unknown when using rust-objdump/llvm-objdump
// in target/riscv64gc-unknown-none-elf/debug
riscv64-unknown-elf-objdump -S xv6-rsicv > kernel.asm
```
Unit Test:
```
cargo run --features "unit_test"
```
target spec:
```
rustc -Z unstable-options --print target-spec-json --target riscv64gc-unknown-none-elf
```

## Difference

### SpinLock
1. while xv6-riscv wraps spinlock into a single object,  
    xv6-riscv-rust wrap a single object into a mutex, which implemented with spinlock.
2. while xv6-riscv use `initlock` to init lock at run time,  
    xv6-riscv-rust use const fn `SpinLock::new` to init lock at compile time.

### AtomicBool for simple symbol
xv6-riscv-rust use AtomicBool to replace simple int symbol in xv6-riscv,  
in cases when these symbols are only written once or are rarely used.  
Reason: safer, don't lose much speed.  

1. `STARTED` in rmain.rs:  
    It is written once by hart0 to tell other harts that some initialization done.
2. `Pr.locking` in printf.rs:  
    It is written once by the thread that panic.

### amoswap and lr&sc
GCC's `__sync_lock_test_and_set` generate `amoswap`,  
while Rust's `compare_and_swap` / LLVM's `cmpxchg` generate `lr`&`sc`.  
Helpful reference: [Rust Atomic compare and swap 2018 editionのRISC-Vソース〜LLVMを添えて〜](https://qiita.com/tomoyuki-nakabayashi/items/1ec7e075d4417c1a1fbe#dive-into-the-llvm-ir)

### Unit Test
xv6-riscv-rust use conditional compilation trick to implement some unit tests.  
Test cases will go in submodule in several mods that is needed to be tested,  
typically named `pub mod tests` in each mod.  
Example:
```
#[cfg(feature = "unit_test")]
pub mod tests {
    use super::*;

    /* test cases */
}
```
With the feature unit_test enabled,  
here is the execution flow: after each hart enter and execute `rust_main`,  
they will call `test_main_entry`, which call each tests submodule.  
Usage: add cargo options `--features "unit_test`

### global_asm
```
global_asm!(include_str!("asm/entry.S"));
global_asm!(include_str!("asm/kernelvec.S"));
```
xv6-riscv doesn't add `.section .text` in *kernelvec.S*(maybe GCC can infer that),  
but it won't work for xv6-riscv-rust, so we have to explicitly add it.  
You can try it by commenting `.section .text` out and then use objdump to see whether `timervec` exists.

### linker script
```
   .bss : {
     *(.bss)
     *(.sbss*)
-     PROVIDE(end = .);     // works for ld, not for lld
   }
+  PROVIDE(end = .);        // works for lld
```
consider the codes in *kernel.ld* above, see the comments.

## Path
- [x] porting console and uart to support printf, p.s., smp = 1
- [x] add register abstraction to support start using mret to return to rust_main
- [x] cpu abstraction and spinlock, add unit_test feature as temp solution
- [x] us spin e lock to synchronize con print sole's ln, and refactor PRINT
- [x] add kernel frame allocator(kalloc), fix writing bug in `timerinit`:  
```
// life is so hard!
// forget to add size_of usize in offset, which causes problem when timer interrupt happen.
mscratch::write((MSCRATCH0.as_ptr() as usize) + offset*core::mem::size_of::<usize>());
```
- [ ] add more to kvm
- [ ] add more to console, i.e., consoleread, consolewrite, console

## TODO
- [ ] `mul a0, a0, a1` is not an error

## Useful Reference
[Why implementing Send trait for Mutex?](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/why-we-implement-send-trait-for-mutex/39065)  
[Explicitly drop](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/is-this-piece-of-codes-in-good-style/39095)  
[fixed-size linked list allocator](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/how-to-implement-a-single-linked-list-in-os-bare-metal/39223)

Commit message:

use linked list allocator as global allocator

README.md, after:

# xv6-riscv-rust
This is a project intending to port xv6-riscv using Rust.  
Most of major differences will be mentioned below,  
while minor differences go to the document/comment in relevant source files.

## Note
1. can only compile on target triple `riscv64gc-unknown-none-elf`,  
refer *.cargo/config* for detail

2. `cargo run` will write things below to the console in the end, which is expected.
```
panickeadni at ckpead niatck 'e'd art 'rrusust_t_mamainin: :enu esd t_main: end of hart 0', src/rmain.rs:34:5
nd of hart 2',o f src/rmain.rs:34:5
hart 1', src/rmain.rs:34:5
```
Reason: there are 3 harts, and `panic` will not acquire the `Pr` lock to write,  
which could be helpful when debugging.

## Usage
Run:
```
cargo run
```
Objdump:
```
cargo objdump --bin xv6-riscv-rust -- -d > kernel.asm

// recommended, some instructions is unknown when using rust-objdump/llvm-objdump
// in target/riscv64gc-unknown-none-elf/debug
riscv64-unknown-elf-objdump -S xv6-rsicv > kernel.asm
```
Unit Test:
```
cargo run --features "unit_test"
```
target spec:
```
rustc -Z unstable-options --print target-spec-json --target riscv64gc-unknown-none-elf
```

## Difference

### SpinLock
1. while xv6-riscv wraps spinlock into a single object,  
    xv6-riscv-rust wrap a single object into a mutex, which implemented with spinlock.
2. while xv6-riscv use `initlock` to init lock at run time,  
    xv6-riscv-rust use const fn `SpinLock::new` to init lock at compile time.

### AtomicBool for simple symbol
xv6-riscv-rust use AtomicBool to replace simple int symbol in xv6-riscv,  
in cases when these symbols are only written once or are rarely used.  
Reason: safer, don't lose much speed.  

1. `STARTED` in rmain.rs:  
    It is written once by hart0 to tell other harts that some initialization done.
2. `Pr.locking` in printf.rs:  
    It is written once by the thread that panic.

### amoswap and lr&sc
GCC's `__sync_lock_test_and_set` generate `amoswap`,  
while Rust's `compare_and_swap` / LLVM's `cmpxchg` generate `lr`&`sc`.  
Helpful reference: [Rust Atomic compare and swap 2018 editionのRISC-Vソース〜LLVMを添えて〜](https://qiita.com/tomoyuki-nakabayashi/items/1ec7e075d4417c1a1fbe#dive-into-the-llvm-ir)

### Unit Test
xv6-riscv-rust use conditional compilation trick to implement some unit tests.  
Test cases will go in submodule in several mods that is needed to be tested,  
typically named `pub mod tests` in each mod.  
Example:
```
#[cfg(feature = "unit_test")]
pub mod tests {
    use super::*;

    /* test cases */
}
```
With the feature unit_test enabled,  
here is the execution flow: after each hart enter and execute `rust_main`,  
they will call `test_main_entry`, which call each tests submodule.  
Usage: add cargo options `--features "unit_test`

### global_asm
```
global_asm!(include_str!("asm/entry.S"));
global_asm!(include_str!("asm/kernelvec.S"));
```
xv6-riscv doesn't add `.section .text` in *kernelvec.S*(maybe GCC can infer that),  
but it won't work for xv6-riscv-rust, so we have to explicitly add it.  
You can try it by commenting `.section .text` out and then use objdump to see whether `timervec` exists.

### linker script
```
   .bss : {
     *(.bss)
     *(.sbss*)
-     PROVIDE(end = .);     // works for ld, not for lld
   }
+  PROVIDE(end = .);        // works for lld
```
consider the codes in *kernel.ld* above, see the comments.

## Path
- [x] porting console and uart to support printf, p.s., smp = 1
- [x] add register abstraction to support start using mret to return to rust_main
- [x] cpu abstraction and spinlock, add unit_test feature as temp solution
- [x] us spin e lock to synchronize con print sole's ln, and refactor PRINT
- [x] add kernel frame allocator(kalloc), fix writing bug in `timerinit`
- [x] switch to global allocator, then we can use Box to allocate memory
- [ ] add paging in kernel(kvminit, kvminithart)
- [ ] replace linked list allocator with buddy system allocator

## TODO
- [ ] `mul a0, a0, a1` is not an error

## Useful Reference
[Why implementing Send trait for Mutex?](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/why-we-implement-send-trait-for-mutex/39065)  
[Explicitly drop](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/is-this-piece-of-codes-in-good-style/39095)  
[fixed-size linked list allocator](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/how-to-implement-a-single-linked-list-in-os-bare-metal/39223)
